Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lops, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Kevin La. He is
professor of behavioral and evolutionary biology at the University
of Saint Andrews in Scotland. He's the author of
several books, and today we're going to focus on
his latest one evolution involving the developmental origins of
adaptation and biodiversity. So, Doctor Lala, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. I appreciate your interest.
So, just to introduce the topic here, in biology,
when looking for explanations for the existence of particular
kinds of traits, what, what kinds of, what different
kinds of explanations can we find in different subfields
of evolutionary biology?
Well, um, There are a number of different questions
one can ask about a trait. Um, YOU could
ask what is its adaptive function. That's the kind
of question that a um behavioral ecologist might ask,
for instance. We might uh focus in on a
particular trait. We use the example in the book
of the turtle shell. Where did the turtle get
its shell? How did it get it? Um, AND
to be a ecologist, it'll be asking, well, you
know, what does a shell do for the turtle?
Uh, AND it's, you know, with a little bit
of research, we can establish that it provides the
turtle with protection. So we're focusing on, on the
adaptive function of the trait, and that can be
put to the test in a number of different
ways. Um, OTHER researchers in other spheres of biology
ask different kinds of questions. Um, DEVELOPMENTAL biologists or
even devo researchers would be more interested in the
developmental origins of the shell in the case of
the, of the turtle. So, so how does the
trait develop over time in the, in the focal
organism? And in, in this case, you've got the
Um, you know, the, the, the ribs effectively spreading
out through the skin to create this carrot paste,
which, um, you know, provides that protection to the,
to the turtle. Um, uh, AND then, you know,
you've got. Paleontologists, for instance, who might be asking
much more about the history of the evolutionary history
of that particular trait, how did it come to
be from what did that um trait evolve, um,
and it, it, in the example we use in
the book, that's quite an interesting question because. In
a way, um, you know, paleontologists initially made a
sort of wrong term. It was perfectly logical to
think this way, but, uh, they thought because, because
turtles are closely related to crocodiles, and crocodiles have
these sort of scaly, um, covering on their back
or ostoderms, that most likely the turtle shell evolved
out of osteoderms, and so they anticipated that their
ancestor would have these osteoderms. And as a consequence,
neglected what turned out to be a critical fossil,
um, that lacked these osteoderms, but also actually lacked
a carapace. It lacked a shell on the top
of its body altogether, but had a shell on
the bottom of its body, on its breastplate, a
plastron. And, um, you know, when this subsequently, um,
came to light and, and the, the true evolutionary
history of uh turtles was understood. Then it became
clear that the initial function of the shell, uh,
was not protection, as the, you know, the behavioral
ecologists had sort of inferred from its current function,
but as a digging platform for these turtles. And
then only subsequently did this carapace evolve to provide
protection. And what's, what's quite nice about that, I
think, is it illustrates, firstly, how Um, you know,
it's, it's healthy to have these different spheres of
biology that are asking different kinds of questions and
collectively, they give us a, a, a richer understanding
of the question, and they can correct each other's
errors when those occasionally do occur in the short
term. Um, BUT also they encourage us to ask
questions that might not otherwise be asked. So, um,
you know, we, we, we might think to ourselves,
Why did the turtle solve the problem of predation
with a shell? Why not have big teeth and
fight off predators? Why not run away? And by
taking this broader perspective, we can, we can get
an answer to that kind of question, um, because
it sort of tells us that, well, Uh, initially,
they had this plastrum, which was, which was really
important for digging, so that kind of prevented growing
long legs to run, run away. And once you
have that, then it's really easy, uh, developmentally speaking,
and, um, in evolutionary terms, to evolve the same
structure in the top half of the body, and
so you get that, that kind of pace evolving.
So, um, you know, multiple perspectives in a science,
I think are extremely healthy.
So at a certain point there, you mentioned developmental
biology. Could you tell us a little, a little
bit more about that subfield? What is developmental biology
and specifically in what ways does it relate to
evolutionary biology?
Yeah, I mean, it's a really good question, because
historically, there's been a separation of evolutionary and developmental
research, and that occurred in the middle, around the
middle of the, the, the last century. You go
back to Darwin's day, actually, um, Darwin was very
interested in, in organisms development and, and used things
like the study of embryos to, to provide evidence
for evolution. But, um, you know, around the 1920s,
1930s, the, the, this separation occurred between these two
fields. It, it, it began, I think, with the
rediscovery, discovery of um Mendel's rules for inheritance, um,
and the integration of that Mendelian inheritance with population
genetics thinking, and that led to, uh, a means
for studying evolution. Without really paying much attention to
development. And I, I suppose that was a very
pragmatic line to take at the time. We really
didn't know very much about development, and, and it's
horrendously complicated. So, um, you know, it's not unreasonable
of researchers to have taken that pragmatic line, but
oftentimes what happens in science is, you know, we,
we make assumptions, and, um, you know, they're made
for good, good reasons, but then, you know, as
Um, Erasmus Winter, philosopher of biology says the sort
of the map becomes the territory. We forget that
this is just a model of the world, and
it sort of becomes the world, and it becomes
almost doctrine that we don't need to know about
development. To study evolution. And the argument we make
in our book, Evolution Evolving, is that, well, that's
true, you can, to some extent understand evolution without
taking development into account, but if you do take
development into account, then you get a better understanding,
you get a richer explanation. Now, I, I guess
I've been talking a lot about Development, I should,
I should perhaps make clear what I mean by
that term because, um, you know, in our book,
we, we are, uh, using it in, in quite
a broad way and a lot of people think
about development in different ways and for some, some
people it's, it's all development means, you know, building
skyscrapers or, or, you know, raising money. Um, OBVIOUSLY,
we're talking about biological development here, but we're also
thinking very broad terms from, from conception, everything that
happens from conception all the way through to death,
the whole of ontology, in other words. So when
I use the term development, and when we use
it in the book, we're talking about things like
what happens to an adult, how adults behave, how
they learn, their, their culture, their Developmental plasticity, all
of those kind of things are important in evolution.
That's the argument I make.
So, uh, at a certain point in the book,
you talk about 5 principles of development. Development is
modular, development is epigenetic, development is constructive. Then you
also talk about the interchangeability of the phenotypic consequences
of a change in DNA and the change in
internal or external environment, and also one that we
could summarize as phenotypic variation being structured and biased.
Could you explain those principles?
Yes, that's right. So um what we try to
do in our book is just in a, in
a single chapter. Sort of summarize, um, and it's
almost an impossible task, but, you know, just, but
we set out to summarize what an evolutionary biologist
or an evolutionary minded researcher needs to know about
development, to, to really do a good job at
understanding evolution. Um, AND of, of course, uh, I
mean, one of our co-authors is a guy called
Scott Gilbert, who writes the developmental biology textbooks, and
his, his textbooks, his undergraduate textbooks are that fact.
Um, YOU know, so there, there's a huge amount
of knowledge that we've kind of condensed down into
this, into this single chapter, and then we put
it in these 5 little sort of bullet points
just to try and bring home these, these key
points that we want to get across. So, firstly,
development is module. That is, um, it's comprised of,
of sort of building blocks, circuits that are um
well integrated and, and, um, you know, have their
own independent structure, and can be used again and
again, a bit like Lego bricks, you know, we
can take this bit of Developmental kit from over
here, from building something, and use it over here
in another part of the body to do something
else for another function. And that's what what evolution
has done repeatedly. A lot of it evolutionary innovations
involve taking circuitry or structures that preexisted. And reusing
them in a new context. The instinct insect wing
was built from from um um developmental machinery that
was initially used to produce insect legs, for instance.
So, um, there's this modular structure, which it turns
out is really, really important when it comes to
understanding evolutionary questions and the introduction of new traits.
There's this second feature, which is that development is
epigenetic, and we're using epigenetic in the sense of
above the level of the gene. So the, the
control of development is above the level of the
gene. And that stands in marked contrast, I think,
to how Many people think about um. Development and
how it's often portrayed in the media, like there's
a genetic program where all of the information is
stored, and that's read out, and there's this kind
of unfolding of this instructions for building a body
and, and uh instructions for how that, that organism
should behave and so forth. We take issue with
that characterization of development. It's much more open-ended, it's
much more flexible and the, the control, the regulation
of, of um Uh, uh, of the outputs, the
phenotypes, the traits of the organism, is at a
higher level than the genes, at the level of
uh a sort of regulatory network of, yes, there's,
there's genes involved, but a whole bunch of other
molecular outputs and, and um signals and environmental inputs,
which collectively influence the structure of the trait. And
that That perspective helps us to account for another
one of the characteristics of development that we, we
placed emphasis on, which is this interchangeability. Of genetic
and environmental inputs, because both genes and environments feed
into the regulatory machinery of development, they're all processed
by the same mechanisms. So you can get the
same phenotypic outputs arising from a genetic mutation and
or an environmental change. We also emphasize how development
is constructive, that is, um, it's, is critically dependent
on the organism itself, the organism an active player
in its own development. Um, One of my intellectual
heroes, Richard Wantin describes um both evolution and development
as a bit like walking on a trampoline. As
you move, you deform the surface, and then you
influence your own trajectory subsequently. We give a nice
example in the book, uh, uh, of, of this
which um involves these, these um dung beetles. So,
um, the, these, these dung beetles, uh, the, the
mother beetle will, will build a brew ball out
of dung and, um, place an egg inside it
and, and insert also a, a, a, a, a
little package of her symbiances inside, and then bury
that underground. And then the infant, when it hatches,
will consume the pedestal, thereby getting the mother symb.
It will, um, it will then feed on the
brood ball. Um, IT will defecate, it will mix
the materials, and in the process, it would distribute
all the bacteria, all the symbiots that he got
from its mother throughout the brood ball, and those
bacteria then go to work in processing, um, all
the chitin and ligning and making the, the, um,
carbon nutrients available to the offspring to consume. So
it's effectively producing more of its own food. And
experiments which have been carried out, which kind of
where you cancel the effects of the organism's activities
and the mother's activities, show that it really does
make a difference. If you don't have that. Modification
of your environment, but both the mother and the
and the and the larvae are engaging in, then
the, the larvae will engage, will, will, will develop
in a completely different way. It will be much
more, much more likely to, to be non-viable or
grow to a far lesser extent. It won't become
sexually dimorphic. It will be quite different as an
organism. So the form of the phenotype that you
end up with, the suite of traits that you
come to possess, depends very much on what you
do as an organism. You control, you influence your
own development. And then there's this last point, which
is that um developmental processes are biased. They're biased
in the sense that certain phenotypes, certain traits, certain
combinations of traits are far more likely to be
produced in development than others. And that, as we
see, um, as we emphasize in the book, as,
as a major importance to um To how we
understand the action of natural selection, selection that is
used is biased by the variation that's available to
you. So,
uh, another question then, what do you mean when
you say that the evolutionary process itself evolves?
Yeah, so, um, To understand this, I think we
need to take a closer look at um natural
selection. I mean, what we're trying to understand ultimately
in the book is, is, um, how adaptive evolution
takes place. So how organisms acquire adaptations, how we
get, um, speciation and, and diversity, the diversity of
life that we see. And we of course always
um. Explain that with natural selection. And that's usually
as far as it goes, but one can look
a little bit closer at how natural selection works.
We can break it down into its component parts,
if you like. And that, I think, is an
instructive exercise. So, um, biologists and, and philosophers have
recognized for some time that in order to get
evolution by natural selection, you need 3 things. You
need some process which is generating variation. In a
typical variation in the traits that are organism exhibits.
You need differences amongst them in their ability to
reproduce, to survive and reproduce fitness differences, and you
need to pass on those qualities from one generation
to the next. You need inheritance in some form.
um PHENOTYPIC variation. Fitness differences Inheritance. If you've got
those three things, natural selection should ensue. But in
principle, you could apply those to the cultural evolution
of the bicycle, right? It doesn't have to be
about biology. It doesn't have to be um satisfied
in that way. Anything that has those three properties
could evolve and produce adaptation. However, evolutionary biologists since
the 1950s, have had a particular way of interpret
interpreting that algorithm. And it's a genetic view, a
genetic vision of natural selection. So when we think
about phenotypic variation, we tend to focus in on
the variation that arises from random genetic mutations. Yeah,
mutations that arise that at random with respect to
their functionality. Uh, AND those are the ones which
we think are really, really important in evolution. And
when it comes to fitness differences, well, we envisage
that natural selection is sorting between genes and genotypes,
and that's what really counts. And when it comes
to inheritance, we focus in on genetic inheritance and
the passive transmission of genes from parent to offspring.
So there's this genetic take on how natural selection
works. But in practice, organisms can satisfy those requirements
for natural selection in other ways. Um, SO to
give you just one example, it's a complicated issue.
We can see how many organisms have extra genetic
forms of inheritance. In the case of humans, we
have cultural inheritance, whereas in the case of plants,
they have epigenetic inheritance. Many animals inherit symbols and
so forth. So those Forms of inheritance in principle
can satisfy natural selection requirements for natural selection. So
when we start to look more closely. We can
actually see how developmental processes are in different ways,
biasing the variation that's produced, the finitive variation that's
produced, modifying the nature of the fitness differences that
the organisms have through their interactions with their environment,
and modifying the, the nature of inheritance and every
organism does it. In their own particular way because
it depends on their own personal characteristics. Plants don't
have a culture, so they can't do, um, you
know, cultural inheritance, but, you know, killer whales can,
humans can. So the characteristics of natural selection, the
way it works for any given organism, and we
give plenty of examples in the book, depends on
the properties of the organism. Natural selection depends on
the properties of the organism, well then it follows
that as organisms evolve, the evolutionary process evolves.
So you've touched very slightly on this topic in,
in just the previous answer, but what is developmental
bias? What does that mean in the context of
developmental biology?
Yeah, so, um Um Developmental bias is a, is
a relatively simple idea. It's the idea that um,
The Variation, the phenotypic variation, the traits that organisms
have or the combinations of traits that arise in
development is biased, so that some traits or some
combinations of traits are far more likely to arise
in development than others. And the significance of that
is that that bias is the action of natural
selection and Influences the patterns of variation that we
see out there in the world. I can explain
it with a uh analogy if you like. So,
um, imagine you're traveling and you stay in a
hotel and you go down for breakfast to the,
to the restaurant where they have a buffet, and
they're serving two kinds of eggs, um, fried eggs
and scrambled eggs. But in this restaurant, The chef
is able to produce scrambled eggs at 10 times
the rate he produces fried eggs. And you look
around the restaurant. And you see, pretty much everybody
is eating scrambled eggs, right? So there are two
kinds of explanations that might account for that. One
is a selective kind of explanation. It could be
that everybody preferred scrambled eggs, and they chose it.
That's kind of equivalent to the traditional way in
which we might explain the variation that we see
in, in nature. But there's another possibility, which is
that the scrambled eggs were just produced so much
more frequently than the fried eggs that people were
constrained to just eat scrambled eggs, that was what
was available. Uh, AND that's an, that's also a
potential explanation, and more likely, what's going on in
the, in the restaurant is a combination of those
two things. And that's what we think is more
likely explanation for the variation that we see in
the world, that it's a combination of um development
bias and selection, which accounts for the patterns that
we see in nature. But in the book, we
do live. Some really quite interesting and compelling examples
of how through studying developmental mechanisms, you can predict
What biases will arise and what patterns of variation
should be observed, and then you go and look
in nature and you see that's exactly the pat.
So you can actually, to some extent, often predict.
The variation that arises in nature by What arrives
in development, what arrives in the first place, and
the rate in which it does so.
So, developmental biology, if I understand it correctly, can
help explain why some of the adaptations exist and
others do not, and why some characters are more
evolvable than others, right?
Exactly. And you know, the historically, of course, evolutionary
bioies have sort of seen some role, a limited
role for developmental biology and evolutionary explanation. So, um,
more commonly rather than talking of bias, we talk
about developmental constraint. And, um, you know, we take
issue with that as a kind of explanatory tool.
We, we suggest that's probably not the optimal way
to think about these issues. And the, the, the
problem is that if you think in terms of
developmental constraints, then The constraints, the developmental aspects can
account for why development does not occur. Uh SORRY,
why evolution does not occur, or why adaptation does,
does not arise. Um, THE, the kind of thinking
that we often encounter is that, you know, Traits
are either possible to produce in development or not.
They're not possible to produce. That's because of developmental
constraints, and that explains why we don't have, you
know, humans with wings, for instance. You know, developmental
biology, you know, never throws up humans with wings.
Um, SO because that's kind of impossible to produce
for various reasons, then that's kind of a constraint
that explains why we don't have that. But if
you want to understand all the things we do
have, natural selection is the answer, right? That's the,
that would be the traditional way of understanding it.
And the problem with that reasoning is it's. It's
all or nothing. It's, it's categorical, you know, rather
than thinking probabilistically about the likelihood of particular variation
being produced, which is actually much more realistic. And
when you think about things in probabilistic terms, that
there's certain patterns of variation that are far more
likely to arise than others. Then you can see
that those developmental processes are not just providing an
explanation for the stuff that we don't have, they're
also contributing to the explanation for the things that
we do have as well, like I explained with
the example of the scrambled egg and uh consumption
in the, in the restaurant. Oh, to come back
to your, you also asked about evolvability. So, um
Evolvability refers to the ability of an organism to
evolve, the capacity to evolve, or, you know, we
can think more fine-grained about the capacity of the
traits of an organism to evolve. And what's been
quite interesting over recent years is the, is the
observation that, that, um, organisms vary in how good
they are evolving. And um Even if we look
in the single organism, we can see a considerable
variation in how, Likely their traits are to evolve,
so. There's been a lot of research into this
in, in recent years, both empirical and theoretical, and
these studies show quite clearly that the capacity to
evolve can itself evolve over time. Um, AND that
as organisms, um, you know, as they evolve, um.
They will encounter certain features in their environments, certain
patterns of variation, and will produce outputs that either
satisfy those, those requirements for the environment or, or
don't, and this will lead to selection on the
relationships between traits. It will lead to Um, plyotropy,
it will lead to epistoic interactions such that combinations
of traits that um are usefully produced together and
more readily produced, combinations of traits that are uh
less usefully put together, um, are less reliably produced,
um. And the net result is you end up
with some traits being more evolvable than others. Um
Again, let me try and give you an example
to, to make it more concrete. So imagine, imagine
you have a A quadruped, an animal with four
legs. Um, AND mutations could arise in any one
of those, um. Legs which would lengthen it or
shorten it. But of course, if you have uh
uh an animal with three legs that are longer
than one, or one leg that's longer than the
others, um, you know, that's not particularly useful variation.
And so, um, We can envisage that um. Over
long periods of time, uh, natural selection will favor,
um, mutations that lead to epiststatic interactions that, that
reinforce symmetry between the legs that, uh, that eradicate
the, um, you know, the, the situations where um
asymmetries arise and, and, and robustly produce symmetry, with
favor plyotropy, so that any change in the, you
know, in the characteristics of a leg will also
affect other legs. And so that gradually over time,
the likelihood of a mutation producing asymmetric asymmetrical length
would be reduced. Now, mutations are still occurring at
random, even after that long period of time. And
they can still increase the length of the legs
or decreases the length of the legs, independently of
what would be beneficial for the organism in that
environment. So it's not on demand as such. But
nonetheless, variation that's kind of been useful in the
past, that's got that symmetrical quality, is favored is
much more evolvable. It's much easier to evolve symmetrical
characters over time, that will change more quickly than.
Variation that generates asymmetrical correspondences between the legs. Those
will be far less likely to arise and will
be less evolvable. So you can see how, you
know, it's a sort of hypothetical example, but it
illustrates how these combinations between traits can arise over
time to produce variation that fits with what was
useful in the past.
Great, but uh uh then there's an important question
to ask here, I guess. In regards to the
developmental processes themselves, where do they stem from? Are
they the result of natural selection?
Yeah, that's a really, that's a really good question.
I, I, I think in a way it's a
kind of key hang up for many people um
in, in embracing the kind of developmental perspective that
um that I and my co-authors advocate in the
book. um. The The way of thinking that's um
is very widespread and um Is a kind of
mental block to embracing it is, is that, you
know, we will, we will happily. Explain developmental bias
through earlier natural selection. So if we see that
there's developmental bias taking place, there's a bias in
the production of the phenotypic variation to produce certain
forms more readily than others, we'll say, oh well,
the reason we have that is because of early
and natural selection. And they'll stop there. That what
they won't consider is that that early natural selection
was also subject to biased developmental variation. And in
fact, you could trace it back all the way
to the beginning of life, and it always be
biased developmental variation, which would be subject to natural
selection. There's actually a reciprocal causal relationship between these,
these characters. There's biased variation being produced in development.
And then natural selection occurs on that bias, sorting
between that bias variation, influencing the bias in the
next generation. Um, AND so we have to think
about things in this reciprocal causal way, and, um,
and that means we can account for the patterns
of variation that we see in nature in terms
of these dual processes, natural selection and developmental bias,
rather than tracing everything back to natural selection. And
that that I think is the logical distinction. Now
you're going to a linear causal model as opposed
to a uh a reciprocal causal model.
Could you explain the phenomenon of plasticity lab evolution
or the ways by which developmental responses to environmental
change can direct genetic change?
Sure, yeah. So this, um, this is an idea
that's come to prominence in, in recent years through
the important work of Mary Jane West Eberhart, um,
who published a, a, a now classic volume in
2003, Developmental Plasticity and Evolution, and, and, you know,
It's a very, very rich book indeed, but one
thing that people have sort of latched on to
is her suggestion that genes can be followers rather
than leaders in evolution, that, that, um, organisms can
respond to environmental challenges plastically through changes in their
development, which adjust their behavior, their phenotype, their traits
to the environmental conditions. And then subsequently over many
generations, um, that can be stabilized through genetic change.
So plasticity comes first, subsequently, genetic change occurs. So
that's the The basic idea Um, an example that
we use in the book concerns, um, blind Mexican
cavefish. Astanics uh Mexican. Uh, SO, um, these are
really fascinating. And when, when these fish were first
discovered in the 1930s, um, they looked so strikingly
different from, from all known fishes, that they were,
they were classified as entirely new genes. Only for
subsequent, you know, sites to establish that the sighted
versions of the same species. We're incredibly widespread in
the rivers and streams of, of Mexico and and
Southern USA. And Um, it's since been established that
there are about 35, um, at the last count.
Independent evolving populations of these blind Mexican cavefish. They
all have a very similar suite of traits. They're
typically, of course, um blind or eyeless, and they
will have um changes in the pigmentation, they'll be
quite white. Um, BUT a whole suite of changes,
changes in In their uh bone structure, in their
metabolism, in their behavior, all kinds of things. And
also some really, uh, you know, intriguing features like
virtually all the populations have got fragmented bones in
their faces. Literally broken up bones. And, you know,
the researchers who study this have this sort of
puzzled by, um, you know, why is it that
they should all have this, this feature? It seems
so random and it's hard to understand rifasi, why
they should have this, this, um. You know, not
obviously beneficial, probably an adaptive characteristic and why it
should repeatedly have evolve. The fact that it repeatedly
evolves suggests that some, some adaptive value. So there
there there's a, there's a suite of, of traits
associated with blind Mexican cavefish, but some are a
little bit sort of odd and um. Light was
thrown on the issue when um a, a, a
team of researchers took the river fish, the, the,
the, the sighted versions of the same species, and
reared them in the dark and the cold to
simulate sort of cave being thrust into the cave
environment. And the offspring of those uh fish. Developed
a suite of characteristics that is strikingly similar to
the blind Mexican cavefish that derived them. And um,
If you look at which traits change in response
to the dark and the cold. They're the same
kind of traits as we see have evolved in
the derived form of the fish, and they respond
to the dark and the cold, often by producing
increased phenotypic variation. And if as researchers have done,
you select on some of that increased inaction, you
see a response to selection in the same direction.
So, um. That those kind of studies, um, and,
you know, various other kinds of experimentation. Present, I
think, a very strong case that what has happened
in, in these fishes is that um they they
respond initially to this, to this challenge of being
in a very dark, cold place, um. Classically, through
the, through the developmental change, and then gradually over
time, that becomes stabilized and you get refinements through
through genetic evolution. And some of the odd features
like the um like the broken up bones, it
turns out, you know, that you can then start
to understand why they have those features because there's
a strong correlation between the, the number of neuromasts
that they have, which are these cells which allow
them to detect water currents, which is really important
if you're foraging in the dark, and you know,
this fragmentation. So, so certain things come to light
when you take this, this developmental perspective. Mhm.
You've done work on niche construction specifically, so could
you tell us about it? What is niche construction?
Each construction is uh the capacity of organisms to
modify their environments and thereby sort of modify the
natural selection that that their population experiences. And it,
and this is a very sort of obvious and
prosaic thing that, you know, every kid knows that
birds construct nests, as do, you know, as do
fishes, um, you know, the ants and bees will
construct mounds and um and and that. Not just,
um, you know, artifacts, you'll see in, everybody knows
that, you know, plants are modifying, um, wind speeds
and, and, um, you know, affecting shade and, and,
um, playing a role in the, in the, in
the hydrological cycle, the cycling of nutrients and so
on and so forth. So. In to a greater
and lesser degree, of course, all organisms will modify
their local environments and sometimes this will feedback to
influence the selection that they experienced. And um, From
a traditional perspective, no, no one would kind of
dispute that that goes on, but, but, you know,
people don't really see that niche construction as playing
causal role in evolution. Um, IT'S something that has
evolved, that we can understand as having evolved through
natural selection, an interesting feature of the organisms, but
we don't see it as part of the process.
It's not part of our explanation for how or
whether or the nature of the evolution that takes
place. But let me go back to an example
to illustrate why it might be better if we
thought about niche construction as playing a causal role.
Um, I'll go back to the example I talked
about of the dung beetles, because of these dung
beetles are kind of classic niche constructors. When the
mother builds that brood ball out of dung. Um,
AND when she inserts the egg in it and
adds in her little pedestal, which contains her a
symbiance, and when she buries it underground, where it's
in a sort of safe, thermally buffered environment, that's
niche construction on her part. Um, AND when the
offspring. Consumes the pedestal and mixes the materials and
builds a pupation chamber, and distributes the symbiots in
ways that allow them to process the, um, you
know, the carbon nutrients, make them available for its
own growth. That is also niche construction, niche construction
on part of the larvae. And What experimenters were
able to show, who, you know, who have carried
out experiments that either allow that niche construction to
take place or prevent it from taking place and
allow that comparison, is that not only does, does
the niche construction make a critical difference to the
development of individual organisms, which traits evolve. But it
affects which traits become statistically associated with other traits.
So it generates new clusters of traits. For instance,
these constructing traits on both the mother and the,
and the larvi's part, get, gets statistically associated and
subsequently co-evolve with traits that respond plastically to the
constructed environment. Yeah, so things like um horn length,
and it's very contingent on the, on the um
activities of the organ and constructing activities. So the
cluster of traits that's Most significantly associated with biological
fitness. Changes as a result of this niche construction.
What that means is through their niche construction, organisms
are affecting the direction that natural selection takes. Yeah,
so which, what, what the niche construction is doing
is effectively shifting. The traits that are associated with
biological fitness and therefore modifying the direction of natural
selection. That's something that we need to take account
of if we want to understand how a population
will evolve and and get a better understanding on
why it evolves in the way that it does.
I mean, I think part of the, part of
the problem historically has been that evolutionary biologists, when
we, when we um seek to understand evolution. We'll
kind of start with selection pressures. We'll, um, we'll.
Examine a system in a laboratory or, or in,
in, uh, in nature, and we'll find that uh
this genotype has got higher fitness and that genotype,
and then we'll come up with an evolutionary explanation
retrospectively for why that should be. But we, our
analysis starts with, with, with fitness differences, and then
when we know there's fitness differences, fitness differences, we
can make predictions about how traits will evolve and
what, what the outcomes will be. But we tend
not to ask. Where did those fitness differences come
from? And so what a developmental perspective can give
us is an answer to that question. In this
case, the niche construction was really critical for creating
those selection pressures.
So, could you tell us about the concept of
dynamic adaptive landscapes and why it is important in
the context of your book?
Mhm. Yeah, so, um, adaptive landscapes are a kind
of, um, conceptual tool, um, that evolutionary biologists use
to, to think about and sometimes also to sort
of model, um, biological evolution. And often, oftentimes they'll
envisage, um, a, a surface, like a landscape, which,
um, you know, if you think in three dimensions,
you could have two dimensions, the X and Y
axis, if you like, which represent two different traits
or different, two different genotypes, and then the, the
vertical axis would represent the fitness. And so you
can plot, uh, uh, uh, um, you know, a
population of individuals on that surface. And, um, if
you know the, the values of the traits of
that individual with respect to those two dimensions, uh,
uh, you can see where they are at any
point in time, and you predict that they would
move up this fitness service to the highest fitness
point, or at least that's the, the traditional expectation.
But what's uh recent research, particularly studying sort of
developmental bias, but also um plasticity and niche construction
has shown Um, you know, formal mathematical models has
established that, um, these assumptions that you can always
travel up to the sort of, um, local fitness
peak is, um, there's not always occurred, it's not
always realized because of the developmental bias in the
system. And what, what developmental processes are doing is
effectively creating, um, viable pathways across that landscape. So
what natural section actually does is push populations along
paths created by developmental processes. And what other developmental
processes like plasticity, like niche construction are doing is
deforming the surface so that as the populations evolve,
that static, that surface is not static. It's, it's
dynamic and, um, you know, hills might appear, or,
or dips in the surface might appear as a
result of the organism's own activities, which will influence
the direction of its evolution. So we need to
take account of these developmental factors again, if we're
going to understand the um adaptive evolution of the
population.
And in what ways can development contribute to evolutionary
innovation?
Well, um, the, the most, uh, there are a
number of ways, um, the, the, the most obvious,
um, way I've, I've already briefly mentioned, which is
that there's this. There's this modular structure to development,
and what that effectively represents is, is pre-established bits
of useful kit that can be, that can be
reused and repurposed for, for, for new roles in
uh in uh uh development and in evolution. So,
um. I mentioned the example of the origins of
insect wings, which are thought to have evolved by
reusing some of the circuitry associated with the production
of insect legs. You can then go further and
say, you know, where did beetle horns come from?
Well, beetle horns actually came through the repurposing of
some of the, you know, regulatory circuitry that underlie
the Development of, of, of, of insect wings. So,
you know, all the time, you're sort of reusing
these, these pre-established, um, tools, these circuits, these, um,
you know, networks, which have got, you know, useful
functions. You don't have to do everything from scratch.
Um, AND one consequence of that is it's a
further introduction of developmental bias into the system, because
if you're using the same bit of kit, Again
and again, then any mutations that occur, any changes
in the operation of those will affect multiple traits
or multiple functionalities in the organism, and so biases
arise in, in the evolution of the system.
And, uh, I mean, this is an additional question.
Can, adding a developmental perspective to evolutionary biology also
help understand how certain traits vary in different ways
across different lineages.
Um, uh, YES, I mean, I, I, I. I
think one has to think about things from a,
a, a species specific uh perspective because, as I
mentioned earlier, the characteristics of the individual organism will
determine. Um, YOU know, how this system will evolve
and the nature of the evolutionary dynamic. So. One
of the, one of the consequences of the, the
sort of traditional view that natural selection is just
natural selection, you know, if, if um if The
only thing that sort of Affects the production of
phenotypic variation that matters in evolution is genetic mutation,
and that occurs at random with respect to function,
and if traits are inherited, Primarily through the transmission
of genes in a passive way from parent to
offspring without introducing any sort of biases in the
transmission process, then, All the direction in adaptive evolution
comes from. Differences in fitness between individuals in a
particular um environmental context. And that applies equally to
fruit flies, yeast, mice, oak trees, and humans. We
all evolve in the same way. Conversely, if you
recognize, as we do. That developmental processes bias the
variation that's subject to natural selection. They Influence which
cluster of traits is statistically associated with fitness and
therefore the direction of selection, and they, um, Affect
the nature of inheritance. They change how traits are
inherited from one generation to the next. Then Each
trait of each organism involves in its own idiosyncratic
way, and you need to take account of that
developmental knowledge in order to be able to understand
the evolutionary dynamics of that system. And, you know,
this is, I think, particular implications for Our understanding
of human evolution because humans don't evolve like fruit
flies and yeast, um, and, you know, For, for
the, for the longest time, of course, there's been
a great deal of conflict, particularly in North America,
between evolutionary biologist and creationist kind of explanations, um,
And, you know, this is a very complicated issue,
and there are multiple reasons for, um, you know,
why people might sometimes be resistant to taking on
board evolutionary explanations. But I think as, as a,
um, you know, as a community of scientists, we
have a responsibility to at least consider the possibility
that sometimes our explanations might appear a little bit
thin. And if we're saying that humans evolve in
exactly the same way that used to evolved, that
might not be credible to many members of the
public. Conversely, I think, if one recognizes that humans.
Don't evolve in the same way as fruit flies
and, and oak trees, because, you know, we develop
differently because we interact with the world differently and
because we inherit valuable resources differently, then it potentially
leads us to richer explanations for human evolution.
So talking about humans, I would like to explore
now an example of our development and extra genetic
inheritance applied to humans. So, could you tell us
about the evolution of the human brain and cognition?
Uh, SURE. Um, So, I guess the, uh, you
know, the, the, the thing that's really, really striking
about the human brain compared with other primates is
it's, its sheer size. It's, um, it's 3 times
the size of chimpanzees, 3 times the number of
neurons, roughly speaking. And you know, the relationship between
Um, brain size and cognitive capability is a very
complicated one, which, you know, it's probably beyond the
realms of this conversation to sort of go into.
Um, BUT, you know, I think it's fair enough
to say other things being held equal, if we're
not making comparisons across vastly different taxonomic groups where
the brains are organized in very different ways. Um,
YOU know, by and large, you've got a bigger
brain, it allows you more processing power, more neurons
lead to. Greater processing power, other things being held
equal, but there's a catch when it comes to.
That, which is the brains are incredibly expensive organs,
um, you know, there's a huge energy budget associated
with, Um, the, the human brain, which humans are
willing to pay, but other apes and other primates,
by and large do not pay, even though they,
they themselves often have very large brains relative to
other mammals. So that raises the question of how,
how have we been possible, how has it been
possible for humans to afford this big brain? Well,
where does the energy come from? It comes from
food. We get our food. By foraging and In
order to Evolve a larger brain. An organism would
have to either forage more efficiently. Or make savings
in other tissues. That, um, allow it to invest
more of its energy budget in its brain. Now
humans have been able to do both, they've been
able to do both because they have this extraordinary
capacity for extra genetic inheritance in the form of
our culture. Um So, if one looks at um
primates in general, particularly gray apes, but also particularly
humans, we see that the um The the really
um. High return foods that are consumed, the high
energy budget foods. Often require a great deal of
um um resource to, to capture, to process in
various ways, and then to consume. So, you know,
think of, think of nuts they've got protective shells,
think of invertebrates that, you know, need to be
caught. Think of vertebrates are even more challenging to,
to catch, um think of resources like honey, where
a whole series of steps that you have to
engage in in order to access it in an
effective way without getting stung to death and so
on. Um, SO that What's actually really well established,
I think, and from studies of, um, you know,
um, behavioral development in primates is that these um
more challenging foods to acquire, but which are energy
rich, are typically learned socially. Animals, um, in primates
acquire these skills through imitation and other forms of
observational learning. And, uh, and there's actually legions of
evidence that that supports that claim now across a
broad range of species, including humans. And um We
can see, if we take a comparative perspective, uh,
correlations between the breadth of an animal's diet, the
richness of an animal's diet, the extent of its
reliance on social learning, the extent of which reliance
on tools, because often to acquire these foods, you
have to use tools, um, the extent of extractive
foraging. These traits, this cluster of traits. Um, TENDS
to have co-evolved again, we see evidence for developmental
bias that cluster of traits co-evolving. So you've got
smart primates like chimpanzees and orangutans, of course, humans
fall into that bracket who are good at all
of those things, good at tools, good at social
learning, good at extractive foraging, very broad diets, um,
and other, um, primates, no nocturnal prosimians, for instance,
that are less good at, at all, all of
those things. So, um, what's going on, so that's
a more cognitive side. So what's going on with
the brain? Well, um, actually you can, it turns
out you can make sense of quite a lot
of the variation in brain size across primates. Through
Including, you know, variation in the individual components of
the brain through variation in the, um, in, in
the whole brain size. Yeah. So the whole brain
evolves in a concerted way, either sort of get,
or gets bigger or gets smaller, and that typically
happens through extending the period of neurogenesis. You just
kind of cook the brain for longer in development,
and that means that certain structures like the neo
uh neocortex and the, uh, and various other Um,
um. Teachers get proportion disproportionately large. So, so the
point I was going to make was the, the
um the capacity. To, um, To grow that brain
is critically reliant on culturally acquired knowledge without that
form of extra genetic inheritance. You wouldn't be able
to generate the energy to cook that brain for
longer and support such a large brain, but then
once you have that large brain, it provides you
with the cognitive processing power. To support all of
the complex learning and behavior that you're utilizing in
a sort of, uh, you know, dynamical feedback way.
So, um, that's one side. But then there's also
this developmental bias, which is, which is playing a
role and showing how the brain areas are evolve
evolve in a concerted way, and that, that, that
similar kind of um co-evolution of traits is occurring
at the behavioral level. And then when it comes
to um The way we process our foods, we
cook our food, we chop our food, we mash
our food, we pound our foods, and all of
those activities are. Uh, IN various different ways, breaking
down the proteins and making the food, um. Easier
to extract the nutrients and the resources. We're effectively
externalizing part of the digestive process, and because we've
externalized the digestive process, We don't need such large
guts in order to, to, um, you know, to
process the foods that we consume internally, and so
we can make energy savings on a gut that
can be invested in our brains. So what has
happened is effectively, you know, we, through our culture
and through our developmental bias, have shifted the balance
from a primate that was um Relying on a
relatively large gut and a relatively small brain. To
a primate that is reliant on a relatively large
brain and relatively small gum.
Great. So I have one last question I would
like to ask you. I know that you are
a proponent, a proponent of the extended evolutionary synthesis.
So, could you tell us about that and what
are the main differences between the modern evolutionary synthesis
and the extended evolutionary synthesis and in what ways
do you think basically that evolutionary theory needs to
be reframed?
Sure, so, um The extended evolutionary synthesis you can
think of as, as, uh, just another way to
think about evolution. It's a conceptual framework. It's um
perhaps best thought of as a, a revised structure
or understanding to how, um, how, how we explain
evolution, um, as I described earlier, the traditional way
of thinking about evolution, the, the way That's dominated
evolutionary biology for um at least 100 years, has
been very sort of gene-centric, gene-focused, that's to say,
of course, we, that, you know, what evolutionary biologists
don't study phenotypes, of course, they do, they study
the traits of organisms in a variety of different
ways, but the explanations that they give, um, you
know, are heavily reliant on genes and gene frequency
change. Evolution is change in gene frequencies, um, that's
how it's Often defined, um, we track evolution through
population genetic models or quantitative genetic models. So genes,
um, and they change over time or how we
make sense of interpret evolution. And the um extended
evolutionary synthesis you can view as one of, I,
I think of it as a kind of umbrella
concept. Um, IT'S in, in many ways, cognitively linked
to, it has cogate links with, with other organism-centered
approaches to evolution like Um, some aspects of Evodevo,
like Ecodevo, like, uh, developmental systems theory or this
construction theory. Um, THERE are, there are a number
of, of, um, movements or subfields, uh, of biology
that place the organism center stage in evolution and,
and Um, place emphasis on the active agency of
the organism and how development matters in evolution. And
the extent of evolutionary synthesis is really just a
sort of umbrella term for, for all of those
things. And when I, um, you know, when in
our book we, you know, we talk about evolution
evolving, we don't really, um, characterize it as an
extended evolutionary synthesis. Um, BOOK, but that's what it
is, but it's equally a book for advocates of
Evodevo and Eco-devo and, and developmental systems theory. We
try and champion all of those approaches and um
They are distinctive because of their emphasis on things
like niche construction, emphasizing our niche construction is important,
the active agency of organisms is important. The plasticity
led evolution is frequently important that extra genetic inheritance
is occurring in a variety of different ways, and
that makes a difference to how populations evolve that
developmental bias is a really central concept, and so
we have this reciprocal causal framework to our understanding.
OF evolutionary change, and that's the evolutionary process itself
evolves over time. This is emphasis on evolvability. So
all of these are ideas that are central to
the extent of evolutionary synthesis that are central to
our book, but also central to a variety of
organism centered approaches, which I think are gaining traction
currently.
Great. So, the book is again evolution evolving, the
developmental origins of adaptation and biodiversity. There it is.
I'm leaving a link to it in the description
box of the interview and Doctor Law, apart from
the book, just before we go, are there any
places on the internet where people can find your
work?
Uh, YEAH, we actually have um a website associated
with the book, uh, evolution Evolving.com. Um, AND, um,
if you go to that website, you can see
um a number of other resources, not just information
about the book, but we've produced some animations, um,
which will In 235 minutes, uh, give you overviews
of how developmental plasticity works or the nature of
extra genetic inheritance. Uh, AND I think these are,
these are really cool, um, educational resources in, in
their own right. So I encouraging, I encourage you
to take a look at those. Thank you.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
real pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much, Ricardo. I appreciate your interest.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zu Mark Nes called Holbrookfield governor
Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnunseroro and Hal
Herzognun Macha Joan Labra Jasent and the Samuel Corriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus Fran David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londono Correa.
Yannick Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine,
Gary Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon
Scorteus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the
Augusta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old
Eringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren,
Jeff McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas
Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert,
Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George
Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert,
Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner,
Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike
Levine, and Jos Net. A special thanks to my
producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom
Venneden, Bernardin Curtis Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbo, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal N Cortiz and
Nick Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Levender,
Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for
all.